Canadian Military History
Volume 14

Issue 4

Article 2

2005

Hollow of Death: Rogers’ Rangers Desperate Fight for Survival
Bernd Horn
Canadian Forces Leadership Institute

Follow this and additional works at: https://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh
Part of the Military History Commons

Recommended Citation
Horn, Bernd "Hollow of Death: Rogers’ Rangers Desperate Fight for Survival." Canadian Military History 14,
4 (2005)

This Article is brought to you for free and open access by Scholars Commons @ Laurier. It has been accepted for
inclusion in Canadian Military History by an authorized editor of Scholars Commons @ Laurier. For more
information, please contact scholarscommons@wlu.ca.

Horn: Hollow of Death

Hollow of Death

Rogers’ Rangers Desperate Fight
for Survival, 21 January 1757
Bernd Horn

D

espite the cold January rain, Captain Robert
Rogers was sweating profusely.1 He knew
time was of the essence. He and his men were
in a precarious position – caught between two
major French garrisons at Fort St. Frederic and
Fort Ticonderoga.2 Their survival lay in evading
the French before they could muster a pursuing
force capable of destroying the Rangers.
Rogers set a grueling pace and his Rangers
made good time. However, his instincts, which
had never betrayed him before, gnawed at him
incessantly. “Keep spread out,” he cautioned
to his men. Then, a thunderclap of muskets
shattered the damp winter air. Rogers felt a sting
of pain as a shot glanced across his forehead. His
worst fear was now realized.
The “scout” gone bad had initially promised to
be not only an adventure but yet another daring
raid by the intrepid Robert Rogers and his
Rangers. Ordered to conduct a scout by Major
Sparks, the commanding officer of Fort Edward,
Captain Rogers assembled a hand-picked team
of experienced woodsmen comprised entirely
of volunteers.3 On 15 January 1757, Rogers,
Lieutenant Stark, Ensign Page, as well as 50
Rangers departed Fort Edward for Fort William
Henry at the head of Lake George, New York.
There they prepared supplies and constructed
snowshoes while they waited for reinforcements.
Two days later they were joined by Captain
Speakman,4 his officers – Lieutenant Kennedy,
Ensign Brewer and 14 of his men, as well as
Ensign James Rogers and 14 men from Captain
Hobbs’ Ranger Company. The men were issued
rations for two weeks (consisting of dried beef,
sugar, rice and dried peas and cornmeal held in

a shoulder knapsack slung over the shoulder
and diluted rum in their canteen), 60 rounds
of ammunition (ball and powder) and blankets
which they draped over their heads and fastened
to their waist belts.
Prior to sunset, that same day, they set off
on their mission. They were tasked, as per
normal, to reconnoiter to gain intelligence on the
French garrison, specifically their strength and
intentions, as well as cause as much “mischief”
as possible – to disrupt, harass and destroy
enemy forces, equipment and morale. Rogers
chose to travel on the ice of Lake George to
avoid the rugged, trackless mountainous terrain
that framed the Lake George / Lake Champlain
corridor. Traveling in Indian file, they made good
time despite the adverse weather conditions and
halted for the night on the east side of the first
narrows. The next morning Rogers discovered
that 11 men had been injured because of the
strenuous march. He immediately sent them
back to Fort William Henry. His war party was
now only 74 strong.
They continued 12 miles down the lake hugging
the shoreline to avoid detection and encamped
on the west side. The following day, after a final
three miles on the lake, Rogers decided it was
too dangerous to stay in the open and led his
group off the ice. Strapping on snowshoes, they
now took to the frozen forest. Progress was slow
as they trudged through the deep snow and
forced their way through the pines overburdened
with snow. By 20 January, Rogers was parallel
to the western side of Lake Champlain about
three miles inland. Well behind enemy lines, the
Rangers were on their guard as they penetrated
even further into French dominated territory.

© Canadian Military History, Volume 14, Number 4, Autumn 2005, pp.5-14.

Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2005

5
1

Canadian Military History, Vol. 14 [2005], Iss. 4, Art. 2

The next morning was ushered in on an ominous
note. It was raining steadily. The Rangers dried
their muskets under covered fires in pits dug out
of the snow about three feet deep. Once this was
accomplished, they set off. They now changed
course and stealthily marched due east under
the dripping trees until they reached the ice of
Lake Champlain. They were now approximately
halfway between the French strong points of
Fort Ticonderoga and Fort St. Frederic (known
as Crown Point by the English). It appeared as
if good fortune was once again favouring the
intrepid bush fighter and his men. Upon reaching
the lake, as if on cue, the French were seemingly
delivering a huge bounty to their antagonists.
Earlier, Sieur de Lusignan, the commandant of
Fort Ticonderoga dispatched a sergeant and 15
men to escort a group of empty sleighs to Fort
St. Frederic to pick up badly needed supplies,
namely fodder and rum. As the French soldiers
bundled up against the wet cold and whipped
their horses to begin their task, few, if any, had
any idea of the danger that lurked ahead. The
sleighs lumbered through the deep wet snow and
quickly began to spread out as each team and
driver settled into a comfortable pace.
Back at the edge of the lake, the Rangers
immediately spied the lead sleds. Rogers
quickly determined a plan of action. He
ordered Lieutenant Stark with 20
men to cut off the lead sled, while
he personally led another group to
backtrack and act as a block should
the sleighs try to retreat. He left
Captain Speakman in the center
with the remainder of the party.
As Rogers hastened to get into
position his heart suddenly sank –
they had miscalculated their prey.
There was 8-10 more sleds than
they had at first realized! Rogers
quickly sent word to Stark to stay
hidden. But, would word reach
his subordinate commander in
time?
The horses were the first to sense
the intruders. The driver buried in
his blankets and furs squinted into
the distance as the cold rain lashed
at his face. He noticed the threat too
late. Although he tried to stop the
6
https://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol14/iss4/2

sled and turn it around the Rangers that poured
onto the ice proved to be too agile, too quick and
too many.
Rogers witnessed Stark and his group dash from
the trees across the slippery snow to intercept
the first sled. It became obvious that he had not
received the warning. They were now committed.
There was no turning back. Rogers reacted
instantly and personally led his group into the
fray. In fact, he captured the first prisoner as the
lead sleigh tried to avoid Stark’s men. Despite the
frantic efforts of the Rangers, the rear most sleds
careened wildly away and back to the safety of
Fort Ticonderoga. Pursuit was hopeless. In all,
the Rangers captured three sleds, six horses and
seven prisoners.
Their apparent dilemma did not elude Rogers
or his men. However, not prone to panic,
Rogers calmly interrogated his prisoners. The
news, although not surprising was unsettling. It
appeared that 200 Canadians and 45 Indians,
all experienced in wilderness warfare – in the art
of la petite guerre (ambuscades, raids, scouting
and individual forest combat), had just arrived
in Ticonderoga.
An additional 50 Indians
were also
expected from Fort St.
Frederic any day. All
this added to an
existing garrison of 600
French regular troops at
Fort St. Frederic and 350 at
Fort Ticonderoga. Further to
the distressing news was the
admission by the prisoners that
the magazines at the forts were wellstocked in preparation for a spring
offensive against the English forts. But
the most disturbing revelation was the
fact that the newly-arrived reinforcements
were well equipped and “in a condition to
march upon any emergency at the least
notice.”
Having learned everything he needed to
know, Rogers wasted no time. He knew
that it was now a race for survival. He
ordered his group to assemble and
expeditiously marched through the
wet, dripping pines to his camp
from the previous night. This was
a calculated risk. Although Rogers
himself preached and adhered to

A member of Rogers’ Rangers, 1753-1773.

Parks Canada PD 213

2

Horn: Hollow of Death

Major Robert Rogers

Johnson. By the fall of 1755, he was
conducting scouts behind enemy lines.

obert Rogers remains one of the
legendary colonial heroes to emerge
from the French and Indian War. His bold
forays against the French were tonic to a
beleaguered public that was under constant
attack by Indian depredations on the New
England Frontier. During a time where
neither the British regulars or the colonial
militia seemed empowered to strike at the
enemy or even defend the settlements,
Rogers and his Rangers represented
fearless offensive action. Finally, someone
was hitting back.

His efforts soon earned him a overwhelming
reputation. “Captain Rogers whose bravery
and veracity,” wrote Johnson, “stands very
clear in my opinion and of all who know
him...is the most active man in our Army.”
By the winter of 1756, the bold forays
behind enemy French lines were regularly
reported in newspapers throughout the
colonies.

R

Born in Methuen, Massachusetts on 18
November 1731, Rogers moved to New
Hampshire near present day Concord
with his family in 1739. He spent his
youth exploring the wilderness and
the proximity of his home town on
the frontier made him familiar with
Indians and their ruthless raids in
time of war. At the age of only 14
he served in the militia during the
War of the Austrian Succession
and received his first taste for both
soldiering and adventure.
From 1743-1755, Rogers pursuits,
which he does not specify in his
journals, but were identified as
smuggling by others, acquainted him
with both the French and English colonies
and the trackless forests that divided
them. However, by 1754, the restless
Rogers was unsatisfied with his lot in life
and he became involved in a counterfeiting
scheme. Only an immediate call to arms
saved him from an inevitable jail term, or
even possibly a death sentence. Waiting
for his impending court date, with the
northern frontier under attack, Rogers
started raising recruits for New England
to serve under John Winslow. But, he
quickly took his newly enlisted charges to
New Hampshire when the governor of that
state offered him a commission in the New
Hampshire provincial regiment. In April,
due to his new found political connection
he was able to avoid conviction on his
counterfeiting charge. Subsequently, he
became a captain of “Company One” of the
New Hampshire Regiment with Lieutenant
Stark as his second-in-command and the
50 recruits he signed up.
At first Rogers and his men escorted
supply wagons between Albany and Fort
Edward. However, Rogers’ knowledge and
experience with the “haunts and passes
of the enemy and the Indian method of
fighting” soon brought him to the attention
of his superior, Major-General William

and Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Gage
recommended regular light infantry units
as a permanent part of the British Army. As
of 6 April 1758, Major-General Abercromby,
now the commander-in-chief of British
forces in North America, awarded Rogers a
formal commission as a captain of a ranger
company and as “Major of the Rangers in
his Majesty’s Service.”
Rogers’ defining moment in the war came in
1759, when he was authorized to conduct a
retaliatory raid against the Abenaki village
of Saint Francis - fiercely loyal to the French
and reputed to be the architects of much
of the misery unleashed on the English
frontier settlements. Rogers proceeded
to surprise and raze the village, killing
approximately 200 Indians. However,
closely pursued by the French and
Indians, his force, which split up to
avoid capture largely perished due
to hunger or enemy action.
The following year, Rogers with 600
rangers led the British invasion
force into Canada via the Lake
Champlain / Richelieu River
invasion route. He was present at
the French capitulation in Montreal.
Subsequently, he was dispatched,
with two ranger companies to occupy
the French trading forts in the west.
With the cessation of hostilities in
North America the Rangers companies
were disbanded and Rogers was given
command of an independent company of
regulars in South Carolina.

Major Robert Rogers
LAC C 6875

In March 1756, Major-General Shirley,
commander-in-chief of the British forces in
North America, ordered Rogers to raise a
60 man independent Ranger company that
was separate from both the provincial and
regular units. His unit was directed to scout
and gain intelligence in the Lake Champlain
theatre, as well as to “distress the French
and their allies by sacking, burning and
destroying their houses, barns, barracks,
canoes, battoes...to way-lay, attack, and
destroying their convoys of provisions
by land and water.” This they did with a
vicious regularity.
The reputation and accomplishments of
the Rangers soon had an impact on British
officers. All wanted Rangers to accompany
their expeditions as a foil against the
enemy’s Canadians and Indians, as well
as their ability to navigate and survive in
the merciless wilderness. Moreover, some
such as George Augustus Viscount Howe,

Rogers had reached his zenith during
the French and Indian Wars. Financial
problems and intrigues resulted in Rogers’
incarceration in both North America and
England. During the American War of
Independence, Rogers seemingly wavered
between sides. However, his British
commission was viewed with suspicion by
the Americans who eventually imprisoned
him as a spy. He subsequently escaped
and offered his services to the British. In
August 1776, he was appointed to the rank
of Lieutenant-Colonel and directed to raise
a battalion which was called the Queen’s
American Rangers. Rogers’ age and years
of hard campaigning, however, began to
show and he was retired on half-pay early
in 1777. He eventually returned to England
where he died penniless and alone on 18
May 1795.

7
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2005

3

Canadian Military History, Vol. 14 [2005], Iss. 4, Art. 2

the principle that one must never use the same
route twice, particularly to return home after a
sortie in enemy territory, he concluded in this
instant that it was unavoidable. It was necessary
first to return to their last campsite to rekindle
their fires to dry their guns in anticipation of
combat with the French. Furthermore, as speed
was now critical, he also believed that following
a beaten path would expedite their escape,
particularly in the wet snow and driving rain.
It was not lost on any of the Rangers that the
hunters had now become the hunted.

map drawn by Mike Bechthold ©2005

Meanwhile, back at Fort Ticonderoga the Rangers
worst fears were quickly realized. As the first
sleds came back into sight, the alarm was
raised. The most inexperienced French soldier
knew that there was only one reason for the
unexpected return of the obviously terrorized
sleigh teams – Rogers! Lusignan immediately
sent off approximately 100 regular soldiers and
colonial troops under the command of Captain
Basserode. He was also fortuitous enough to
have with him the experienced Ensign of Les
Troupes de la Marine, Charles de Langlade, who
led the Indians and Canadian volunteers which
numbered about ninety.5 Together they hoped
to intercept the English on their return to Fort
William Henry.

8
https://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol14/iss4/2

As the Rangers dried their muskets, Rogers
quickly assembled his officers. Although many
disagreed with Rogers decision to retrace their
steps, he overruled them and ordered them to
prepare their soldiers for the march. As the
rain continued to fall, the Rangers, with their
muskets and powder carefully tucked under their
blankets, which they wore as overcoats, set out in
single file. Rogers and Lieutenant Kennedy were
at the front, Captain Speakman in the center
and the reliable Lieutenant Stark at the back.
Sergeant Walker commanded the rear guard.
The Rangers advanced approximately half a mile
over broken ground in this formation when they
reached a deep valley. The terrain was unforgiving
and Rogers was extremely apprehensive.
Most of the other Rangers, however, were less
preoccupied. Fatigued, wet and cold, they trudged
along trying to keep up with the pace Rogers
was setting. Most stared at the ground directly
to their front. Knowing Rogers was at the lead
brought a sense of security and confidence. His
reputation as a bush fighter was only surpassed
by his innate ability at navigation through the
forbidding wilderness.
4

Horn: Hollow of Death

French Courier de Bois with Indian Ally.

from L’Abbé H. R. Casgrain, “Les Francais au Canada”

But the Rangers were not the only soldiers
marching expeditiously in the rain. The French
sortie quickly departed the relative comfort
of Fort Ticonderoga and boldly struck out to
intercept the insolent English troops. Langlade
and his Canadians and Indians broke trail as
they were the sole personnel with snowshoes.
Moreover, this was their type of war – at which
they excelled.
Langlade quickly deduced the route Rogers had
taken. The rugged inhospitable terrain narrowed
the options of approach and passage through
the Adirondacks. He was soon rewarded as they
came upon the Rangers’ earlier path. This the
French followed until they came to a suitable
ambush site. The constant rain and wetness
made their flintlocks unreliable. Therefore, they
needed a spot where they could quickly fall upon
and overwhelm the English interlopers.
At mid-afternoon, after marching only
approximately a mile and a half, as the lead
elements reached the top of the west side of yet
another ravine, the sudden solitary roar of a
musket discharging was quickly drowned out
by a thunderclap of explosions as the nearly 200
Frenchmen, Canadians and Indians, deployed in
a semicircle around the valley, unleashed their
fire on the unsuspecting Rangers. Luckily, the
volley was less than effective due to the wetness of
the muskets. However, the French arrayed a mere
five to thirty yards from the Ranger column now
fell upon them with tomahawks and bayonets.
Despite the obvious disadvantage, the Rangers
reacted quickly. The opening volley killed two and
wounded several others, including Rogers, but
instinct, as well as an ingrained sense of survival,
took over. Rogers, known for his courage and
coolness under fire, ordered his men to return
fire and withdraw to the ridge on the far side.
Lieutenant Stark and Sergeant Brewer seeing
the crisis unfolding immediately formed up the
rear of the column, approximately 40 men, into
a defensive posture on the high ground and
prepared to cover the retreat of their comrades.
The struggle was desperate. The forward most
Rangers became embroiled in savage hand to
hand combat. Not all could break away – those
who could were hotly pursued and only reached
the safety of the far hill as a result of the brisk

Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2005

fire from Stark’s group which beat the French
pursuers back. Not before, however, several
others were killed or taken captive.
Rogers now deployed his remaining force.
Lieutenant Stark and Baker held the center.
Ensign Rogers and Sergeants Walter and Phillips
were moved into a position in reserve to watch the
enemy’s movement and prevent the Rangers from
being flanked. Both sides continued to exchange
fire. Darkness was now the Rangers’ only hope.
Outnumbered, inundated with wounded, and low
on ammunition, the Rangers were in a precarious
position. Moreover, Rogers was unsure if French
reinforcements were at this moment moving
toward the battlefield.
The Rangers, however, were not the only ones
in a precarious situation. Their seven prisoners
faced an uncertain future. Unbeknownst to them
their escort was ordered by Rogers to “knock
them on the head” and kill them should the
Rangers come under contact with the enemy
to avoid having potential foes lurking amongst
them if the situation became untenable. At the
back of the column the prisoners could not see
9
5

Canadian Military History, Vol. 14 [2005], Iss. 4, Art. 2

Library and Archives Canada (LAC) C 3165

what was happening, but
by the volume of gunfire
they rightly surmised that
a French rescue party
had arrived. Their good
fortune was short lived.
The Ranger guards quickly
went about dispatching
their charges so that they
could move forward and
assist unencumbered
with the battle. For some
unexplainable reason,
only three of the captives
were actually killed, the
other four in the end were
recovered by their French
comrades.6

not to be cheated of their
prize and pressed an attack
on the center. Fortunately
for the Rangers, sheltered
by large trees, they were
able to keep up a steady,
accurate fire which inflicted
substantial casualties on
their antagonists forcing
them to retire once again.

Tenaciously, the French
attempted to flank the
Rangers yet again, but were
unable to do so because
of the swift and effective
response of Roger’s reserve
force. This final defeat broke
the spirit of the French. The
regulars with no snowshoes
But that was only one small
were limited in their ability
drama of many that played
to manoeuvre – floundering
itself out in the depth of the
in the knee-deep wet snow.
North American wilderness
Iroquois going on a scout.
Furthermore, they were
on that sodden January
unaccustomed to this type
afternoon. No sooner
of individualist combat. As
had Rogers completed
a result, the French now settled into exchanging
positioning his troops when the cry went up
a steady, and not altogether ineffective, fire with
that the French were attempting to flank them
the Rangers. Mr. Baker was one of several who
on the right. Ensign Rogers and Sergeants Walter
was killed and Rogers himself sustained another
and Phillips quickly led the reserve in a quick
counter attack and delivered a volley that beat
wound – taking a musket ball through his wrist
back the French sortie. However, the French were
which disabled him to such an extent that he was

The Seven Years War:
1756-1763

T

he Seven Years’ War was arguably one
of the first global conflicts. It was fought
in Europe, North America and India, with
maritime operations reaching out over the
Atlantic and Indian Oceans, as well as the
Mediterranean and Carribean Seas. At its
core, Austria, France, Russia, Sweden and
Saxony, deeply concerned over Prussia’s
growing strength and territorial expansion
under Frederick the Great, formed a
coalition designed to defeat Prussia. Not
surprisingly, England, already involved in a
colonial and maritime struggle with France,
entered into an alliance with Prussia.

In North America, the conflict (often termed
the French and Indian War) actually began
two years earlier in the late spring of 1754.
The growing competition for the rich lands
of the Ohio Valley proved the catalyst for the
latest round of conflict between the French
and English colonies. Robert Dinwiddie, the
Governor of Virginia, concerned with the
10
news that the French and Canadians were
solidifying their claim to the Ohio by means

https://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol14/iss4/2

of constructing a series of forts, dispatched
Lieutenant-Colonel George Washington
and a detachment of militia to build a fort
of their own on the forks of the Ohio River.
A confrontation soon ensued. Washington
and his party were subsequently defeated
by the French at Great Meadows (Fort
Necessity) and pushed back over the
Allegheny Mountains. A second attempt
by Major-General Braddock was made
the following summer, but his force was
ambushed near Fort Duquesne and virtually
annihilated.
The North American theatre eventually
became part of the greater conflict. Initial
French victories and English set-backs in
the early years of the war were reversed
by 1758, due to the British decision to
focus their strategy and resources on
the wilderness campaign. A virtual naval
blockade, in concert with an infusion of more
than 20,000 British regulars, turned the tide.
The capture of the Fortress of Louisbourg
and Fort Frontenac in 1758, forced the
French to adopt a defensive posture
centered around Quebec and Montreal. The
deteriorating French condition also resulted
in the defection of a large number of their

Indian allies.
In 1759, the British began to roll up the
remaining French forts on the frontier. One
army captured Fort Niagara, and another
marched up the Lake Champlain / Richelieu
River corridor, while a third invested
Quebec. The siege ended in September
1759, with the British victory on the Plains of
Abraham. The remnants of the French Army
and their Canadian militia and remaining
Indian allies withdrew to Montreal in hopes
of recapturing Quebec in the spring.
Although almost successful, as a result of
their victory in the Battle at Ste. Foy and
subsequent siege of Quebec in April 1760,
the appearance of the Royal Navy, forced
the French to return to Montreal where they
later surrendered on 8 September 1760.
The war was formally ended by the Treaty
of Paris which ceded virtually all of New
France to the British.

6

Horn: Hollow of Death

unable to load his musket. Fearing the impact on
morale as a result of his latest wound, Rogers
sent word by runner to his officers that he was
fine and that all should keep up a diligent fire
and hold their positions.
Rogers was not the only individual to sustain
multiple wounds. Thomas Brown, a 16-year-old
Ranger private was one of those wounded in the
initial discharge with Rogers. Although he was
able to make it back to the center of the Ranger
position and join in the firefight, his musket was
soon disabled by an enemy ball that cut it off at
the lock. He then took a ball in the knee and as
he tried to withdraw to the rear of the position
took another ball in the shoulder.

LAC C 113193

As the woods echoed with the clap of constant
fire, darkness started to seep into the already
overcast sky. Sensing their chance of capturing
the “forest runners” was slipping away, the French
attempted various stratagems to try an induce the

Above and left: Canadian Militiaman.

Rangers to surrender. First they threatened them
with dire consequences if they refused to submit,
warning that a large number of reinforcements
was on the way which would “cut” the Rangers “to
pieces without mercy.” Other times, they flattered
and cajoled them, “declaring it was a pity so
many brave men should be lost.” This was always
followed by a guarantee that upon surrender they
would “be treated with the greatest compassion
and kindness.” Rogers, particularly, was singled
out by name and given “the strongest assurances
of their [French] esteem and friendship.”
As the light finally disappeared, both sides
stopped firing. The cloak of darkness could
not have come sooner. The Rangers had a large
number of severely wounded who could not
travel without assistance and their ammunition
was almost exhausted. Moreover, their proximity
to Fort Ticonderoga gave the enemy a distinct
Parks Canada PD 517

Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2005

11
7

Canadian Military History, Vol. 14 [2005], Iss. 4, Art. 2

Private Rogers’ Rangers by Barry Rich
Parks Canada PD 161

Their plan was not to be. Thomas spied an Indian
coming toward the small group huddled around
the fire. He crawled away from the fire so that he
could not be seen, although he was able to witness
the horror that was about to unfold. “The Indian
came to Captain Spikeman, who was not able to
resist,” explained Brown, “and stripped him and
scalped him alive.” Baker, who was lying next to
Speakman pulled out his knife and tried to kill
himself but the Indian stopped him and carried
him away.

advantage. They could easily deploy additional
forces and simply overwhelm the hard-pressed
Rangers during night, or at first light. As a result,
Rogers decided to use the night to make his
escape. He issued his orders expeditiously and
those capable of marching set off.
The French stayed on the battlefield throughout
the night attempting to track down the Rangers.
During this period they received a reinforcement
of 25 men, a convoy of food and munitions, as
well as a surgeon and chaplain.7 Although unable
to come to grips with Rogers and his main body,
the French were able to capture several of those
too wounded to escape.
As such, for the seriously wounded, the night
harbored no safety. Brown later explained that
Captain Speakman, Baker and himself, all
badly wounded had withdrawn to the rear of the
position and built a small fire to keep warm. In
the dark, they suddenly realized they could no
longer see or hear any of their men. Speakman
called out to Rogers but received no reply. They
now realized those Rangers capable of flight had
departed. Thomas could barely walk and the
other two “could scarcely move.” Therefore, the
three decided to surrender to the French.

Witnessing this atrocity, Brown decided to attempt
to escape as best he could. As he crept along, he
passed a corpse of a Ranger. Not having shoes
or leggings any longer, he stopped long enough
to pull off the stockings, the individual had no
shoes, to protect his own legs. By now the French
had become aware of the Ranger withdrawal and
had made a fire and deployed large numbers of
sentries on the Rangers’ path. Brown, without
shoes and with great loss of blood, despite his
pain and agony, was able to elude capture until
the next day.
At about noon, he heard shouts of Indians behind
him and within minutes four of them came
running toward him. Struck with fear, he threw
off his blanket and quickened his pace. Suddenly
he heard the cocking of muskets. The Indians
told Brown to stop. He refused, hoping for a
quick death by being shot rather than the fate
that befell Captain Speakman. The Indians soon
over took him, but surprisingly, did not kill him.
They quickly rifled through his pockets and took
his money. They then took some dry leaves and
put them in his wounds. They then turned about
and ordered Brown to follow them into captivity.8
That same morning the other surviving Rangers
reached Lake George approximately six miles
south of the French pickets. Once on the lake
travel was somewhat easier. Rogers immediately
dispatched Lieutenant Stark with two men to
make best speed to Fort William Henry to arrange
sleigh transport for the wounded.
Remarkably, Sergeant Joshua Martin another
one of the seriously wounded who was left
behind because of a shattered hip and a stomach
wound, refused to die. Dragging his crippled

12
https://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol14/iss4/2

8

Horn: Hollow of Death

Rangers engage Indians in hand-to-hand fighting by Ted Zuber

body through the freezing cold snow, he limped
and crawled in pursuit of the Ranger main body.
On the morning after the battle, unlike Brown,
he caught up with the others on the ice of Lake
George. Martin actually recovered and went on
to serve with the Rangers for the remainder of
the war.
The following morning, 23 January 1757, a
party of 15 men and a sled under command
of Lieutenant Buckley of Hobbs’ Company of
Rangers met the ragged column at the first
narrows. That night, the survivors, 45 effective,
and nine wounded arrived at Fort William Henry.
The grim, bitter wilderness struggle was
exceedingly costly. The Rangers suffered 14
killed, 6 wounded and 6 captured – a total of
26 of 74 participants, or a casualty rate of 35
percent. Rogers’ estimates of French dead, which
he claimed to be 40 in his report to General
Abercrombie and 116 in his later published
journal, were both overly optimistic. French
accounts revealed a toll of 14 killed and 24
wounded.9

Not unusual, both sides claimed a victory.
However, each side interpreted the actions of
their commanders in a different light. Rogers
and his Rangers received praise for their bold
strike at the French. At this juncture of the war,
and particularly in this region, the Rangers
represented the only real successful offensive
strikes at the enemy. Their feats proved good
for public morale. The high casualty toll was
accepted by Rogers’ superiors as the inevitable
cost of such ventures.
As for the French, although the courage and efforts
of the soldiery were commended, Lusignan, the
commandant of Fort Ticonderoga, actually
earned censure from Louis-Antoine Comte de
Bougainville, an aide to Lieutenant-General
Montcalm. Despite the relative success of the
French sortie, Bougainville criticized Lusignan
for “having weakened his garrison considerably
and thus running the risk of being taken [Fort
Ticonderoga] by a surprise attack.”
The savage struggle at la Barbue Creek on that
wet January afternoon never proved to be a

13
Published by Scholars Commons @ Laurier, 2005

9

Canadian Military History, Vol. 14 [2005], Iss. 4, Art. 2

critical tactical engagement of the war. Rather, it
represented just another of a continuing series
of “cat and mouse” engagements that framed
much of how conflict in the North American
wilderness was waged during the early years of
the Seven Years War (commonly referred to as
the French and Indian War). Nonetheless, the
contest was important. Constant scouts and raids
served many important functions. They provided
intelligence and attacked the enemy, thus,
depleting his physical and material strength, as
well as his morale.
Rogers’ strike behind enemy lines, despite
his close escape, proved important if for no
other reason then to let the French and their
Indian allies know that they no longer owned
the forests. Nonetheless, for the Rangers, the
nondescript ravine in the Adirondacks became
a hollow of death where they fought savagely for
their survival.

4.
5.

6.

7.

Notes
8.
1.
2.
3.

For more information on Robert Rogers’, see inset box
on page 7.
For more information on Seven Years’ War, see inset box
on page 10
The following sources were used to prepare this text:
Russell P. Bellico, Chronicles of Lake Champlain.
Journeys in War and Peace. New York: Fleischmanns,
1999, pp.143-147; Bougainville, Louis Antoine
Bougainville (Edward P. Hamilton, editor and translator),
Adventure in the Wilderness (Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press, 1964), pp.81-82; H.R. Casgrain,
ed. Journal du Marquis De Montcalm durant ses
Campagnes en Canada de 1756-1759 (Québec: L.J.
Demers & Frère, 1895), pp.147-148; John R. Cuneo,
Robert Rogers of the Rangers (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1959), pp.45-51; Dictionary of
Canadian Biography, Vol IV, 1771-1800 (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1979), pp.679-682; John D.
Lock, To Fight with Intrepidity...The Complete History
of the US Army Rangers 1622 to Present (New York:
Pocket Books, 1998), pp.31-40; Burt G. Loescher, The
History of Rogers Rangers. Volume I - The Beginnings
Jan 1755 - 6 April 1758 (Bowie, Maryland: Heritage
Books, Inc., (1946) reprint 2001), pp.111-140, 325-350;
Francis Parkman, Montcalm and Wolfe (New York: The
Modern Library, 1999), p.222; Timothy J. Todish, The
Annotated and Illustrated Journals of Major Robert
Rogers (Fleischmanns, NY: Purple Mountain Press,
2002), pp.57-64; and Warfare on the Colonial American
Frontier: The Journals of Major Robert Rogers & An
Historical Account of the Expedition Against the Ohio
Indians in the year 1764, Under the Command of Henry

9.

Bouquet, Esq. (Reprinted from an original 1769 Edition
- Bargersville, IN: Dreslar Publishing, 2001), pp.35-41.
Captain Speakman is often misspelled as Spikeman in
contemporary accounts.
The exact numbers are difficult to ascertain. Rogers
gives a figure of 250 French in his journals, although it
is largely agreed that this number is somewhat inflated.
Bougainville states that 100 French regulars were
dispatched but does not quantify the number of Indians
or Canadians. Parkman, quotes the Governor of New
France, Philippe de Rigaud de Vaudreuil, as stating that
the French sortie against Rogers totaled 89 regulars and
90 Canadians and Indians. Loescher gives the number
as 115 (inclusive of Regulars, Canadians and Indians) at
one point, but later states the number could be anywhere
from 145-250.
The fate of the prisoners is also contentious. Rogers
does not mention his orders to kill the prisoners, nor
does he state what happened with them. Nonetheless,
the Rangers did not return to Fort William Henry with
prisoners or scalps. Cuneo and Loescher state the
prisoners were killed. Bougainville states four were
recovered.
At 8:00 p.m. two Canadians arrived at Fort Ticonderoga
with a message that the French forces were low on
ammunition. As a result, a detachment of 25 men to
carry powder and rations (biscuits), as well as a surgeon
and priest were dispatched. “Relation de L’action lancé
contre les anglois ce les frontier, 21 Janvier 1757
(Carillon),” National Archives of Canada (NA), Microfilm
C-362, Bourlamaque Collection, Vol IV, 11 March 175618 April 1760, p.310.
See Cuneo, 49 and Loescher, 331-340 for a description
of Brown’s subsequent captivity.
Again, exact numbers are difficult to nail down.
Bougainville gives the French total at 11 killed, 27
wounded of which 3 later died. Lieutenant-General
Montcalm’s account concedes only 9 killed and 18
wounded (some of which he states later died of wounds).
Parkman quotes Vaudreuil as giving total casualties
at 37. Bellico states that French casualties amounted
to 19 killed and 27 wounded of which 23 later died
and Loescher puts them at 18 and 27. Bougainville
and Montcalm assigned to the Rangers 42 dead, and 8
captured.

Colonel, Dr. Bernd Horn is the Director of the
Canadian Forces Leadership Institute. He is
also an adjunct-associate professor of history
at the Royal Military College of Canada.

14
https://scholars.wlu.ca/cmh/vol14/iss4/2

10

