Saber and Scr oll
Volume 3
Issue 2 Spring/Su mmer 2014Article 7
March 2014
The R anger Raid on S t. Francis
Francis M . Hoeflin ger
American Public University System
Follow thi s and a dditional w orks at:http://d igitalcommon s.apus.edu/s aberandscroll
Part of the Military History Common s
This Article i s brought to you for f ree and ope n access by the eP ress Journals at Di gitalCommon s@A PUS. It has be en accepted for inclusion in S aber
and S croll by an author ized admini strator of Di gitalCommon s@A PUS. For mor e infor mation, p lease contactdigitalcommon s@a pus.edu.Recomme nded Citation
Hoeflinger, Francis M. (2014) " The R anger Raid on S t. Francis,"Saber and Scr oll: Vol. 3: I ss. 2, A rticle 7.
Available at:http://d igitalcommon s.apus.edu/s aberandscroll/vol3/iss2/7
 
68            Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                    Spring/Summer 2014  Military History 
The Ranger Raid on St. Francis  
 
Francis M. Hoeflinger 
The Ranger’s Raid on St. Francis (4 October 1759)  
 
 Was the raid on St. Francis a proper mission for a Ranger force 
and did it have a strategic impact on the French and Indian War? 
The Ranger raid executed against the Abenaki Indians village of St. 
Francis on 4 October 1759 was conducted against the backdrop of 
the French and Indian War’s Mohawk Valley theater of operations. 
However, addressing the question of the Ranger utility in conduct-
ing the raid also raises several additional questions: Was the raid ef-
fective? Did Roger’s comply with his orders? Was the raid more of a 
propaganda victory than a tactical or strategic one? This paper will 
answer these questions as well as the veracity of the reporting on 
both sides. 
 
Background on the French and Indian War  
 
 The French and Indian War was the name of the conflict fought 
in North America as part of the global conflict known as the Seven 
Years’ War. The war was fought along the frontier between the 
French and British North American colonies from modern-day No-
va Scotia south towards Virginia and as far west as modern-day De-
troit. The genesis for the war was the dispute over natural resources 
and boundaries between the competing kingdoms and their subjects 
in the New World. The French began fortifying the “lands upon the 
River Ohio”1 at the same time that the British Royal Colony of Vir-
ginia claimed the land. In response to the French actions, Virginia’s 
governor, Robert Dinwiddie, sent a militia Major by the name of 
1Hoeflinger: The Ranger Raid on St. Francis
Published by DigitalCommons@APUS, 2014
 
Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                 Spring/Summer  2014                69 George Washington to carry messages to the French in an attempt 
to resolve the dispute diplomatically at the local level.   
 A series of diplomatic and military moves and counter-moves 
ensued, culminating in Lieutenant Colonel Washington ambushing a 
diplomatic party and killing an officer of the French Royal Army.2 
Washington had been in the process of reinforcing Britain’s claim to 
the area by building a compound later called Fort Necessity.3 To 
exasperate matters even further, there were very different descrip-
tions of the events leading up to the death of the French officer En-
sign de Jumonville and nine of his men. Washington reported “We 
killed Mr. de Jumonville , the commander of the Party, as also nine 
others; we wounded one, and made Twenty- one Prisoners.”4 When 
diplomatic documents were discovered, the true intent of the 
French patrol was realized.5 
 The French claimed that one of their soldiers escaped the initial 
ambush and watched as members of Washington’s patrol murdered 
the ensign in cold blood.6 To make matters worse for the British, 
Washington had placed his “fort” in an indefensible position and 
the French forced him to surrender. As part of the capitulation, 
Washington signed the surrender document (written in French), 
without (in his words) understanding what he was signing. What 
was included in the document was the statement that Washington 
had “murdered” Ensign de Jumonville. This led to active combat in 
the North American Theater.7 
The fighting in the North American Theater pitted the French 
military and militia units and their Native American allies against the 
British forces and their Native American allies. The French attempt-
ed to maximize their combat power by enlisting the various tribes in 
the area to supply warriors to supplement French forces and to con-
duct independent operations in support of French military objec-
tives. 
2Saber and Scroll, Vol. 3, Iss. 2 [2014], Art. 7
http://digitalcommons.apus.edu/saberandscroll/vol3/iss2/7
 
70            Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                    Spring/Summer 2014   The British felt that the addition of the Native American contin-
gent to the French forces placed them at a disadvantage, and at-
tempted to recruit Native American tribes to their cause. This 
caused difficulties for the various Native American Tribes that lived 
in the North American Theater of operations, because it pitted 
nominal Indian allies against each other. The contentious subject of 
religion added to the already grand animosity. The French were a 
predominantly Catholic nation and the British predominantly 
Protestant. Additionally, some of the individual Native American 
Tribes had converted to one of the European religious denomina-
tions. The Abenaki had converted to Catholicism in the 17th Centu-
ry.8 
 
The French and Indian War in New England  
 
 This article will concentrate on the Mohawk River Valley and 
the New England area of Operations of the French and Indian War. 
The year 1759 would prove pivotal for British fortunes in North 
America. The “de facto” British Prime Minister, William Pitt, was 
determined to make the year 1759 pivotal by defeating the French in 
North America before turning his attention to other theaters of op-
eration.9 The British strategy was to concentrate their force in ac-
tions along the eastern Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence River. The 
British succeeded in gaining victories at the battles of Fort Niagara 
(6 – 26 July 1759),10 La Belle-Famille (24 July 1759),11 Fort Carillion 
(26 -27 July 1759),12 and the Plains of Abraham (13 September 
1759).13 The Battle for Fort William Henry was a disastrous defeat 
for the British, because of the massacre of the garrison and their 
family members by the Abenaki Indians who were aligned with the 
French after the French accepted the garrison’s surrender and 
agreed to let them leave under a flag of truce.14    
3Hoeflinger: The Ranger Raid on St. Francis
Published by DigitalCommons@APUS, 2014
 
Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                 Spring/Summer  2014                71  General Jeffrey Amherst then decided to launch a raid against 
the Abenaki base of operations, the village of St. Francis. The 
Abenaki had been raiding and pillaging the English settlements 
along the Atlantic coast in modern New England since at least the 
seventeenth century. Amherst also desired to destroy the myth of 
Indian invulnerability in “woodland” fighting.  
 
Major Robert Rogers  
 
 Major Robert Rogers was probably the most famous 
“woodland” fighter of his day. Rogers was born around 1731 in the 
colony of Massachusetts Bay and spent his formative years in the 
New Hampshire back-country. Rogers spent his early youth hunting 
and exploring the woods.15 Rogers first encountered and became 
fascinated with the American Indians in his youth, studying their 
ways, culture, habits and even language.16 Rogers first gained com-
bat experience when he joined the Militia Company from Rumford 
Massachusetts in 1746, and fought Indian raiders until the end of 
the King George’s War in 1748.17 
 Rogers earned a commission from Governor Shirley, when he 
raised enough recruits for the French and Indian War, and became 
the unit’s Captain. Rogers’ utility to the British became critical 
through a series of scouting missions and long distance raids that he 
and his men successfully conducted. Authorized by Amherst to raise 
a “Regiment of Rangers,” Rogers succeeded in drawing high quality 
recruits to his unit. 
 
Overview of the conduct of the raid 4 October 1759  
 
 Rogers left with two hundred handpicked Rangers and proceed-
ed by boat up Lake Champlain. Rogers left a security element at the 
4Saber and Scroll, Vol. 3, Iss. 2 [2014], Art. 7
http://digitalcommons.apus.edu/saberandscroll/vol3/iss2/7
 
72            Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                    Spring/Summer 2014  site chosen to cache the boats and proceeded overland towards his 
target. French soldiers on patrol discovered Rogers’ cache site, and 
the security element caught up with Rogers and warned him of the 
loss.18 The loss of the cache site was a twofold problem for Rogers. 
He not only lost the planned mode of transportation back to Crown 
Point, he also lost all the provisions stored at the cache site to sus-
tain the Rangers after the raid during the exfiltration. 
 The Abenaki, forewarned that there was enemy (British) activity 
in the area, moved the majority of their warriors to the village they 
believed to be Rogers’ actual target. The Ranger leaders, as would be 
recognizable by any modern Infantryman, conducted a reconnais-
sance of the village and determined the village layout, including the 
location of the key buildings, the communal storehouse and the 
Catholic Church. The Rangers set a cordon on the far side of the 
village along the St. Francis river, a probable escape route, and were 
ordered to kill any Indians that attempted to escape in that direc-
tion. Rogers’ plan was to divide his force into three elements. Each 
element would attack a different sector of the village. Rogers de-
tailed the Rangers either to attack a specific building, or to act as 
sharpshooters, engaging any combatant when possible.19 Rogers 
attacked at 0515hrs20 and claimed that the Abenaki were unable to 
offer effective resistance and the raid was over by 0700hrs. Rogers 
looted the community storehouse and burned the entire village, in-
cluding the church, to the ground. 
 
Controversy surrounding Abenaki casualties  
 
 Rogers took almost six weeks to travel from his base camp at 
Crown Point to the Village of St. Francis, approximately one hun-
dred fifty miles north of Crown Point. After the raid, he and his 
men evaded capture and returned to Fort Number 4 in modern-day 
5Hoeflinger: The Ranger Raid on St. Francis
Published by DigitalCommons@APUS, 2014
 
Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                 Spring/Summer  2014                73 Connecticut. Rogers claimed that he lost three officers and forty-six 
men out of a force of one hundred forty-two Rangers that conduct-
ed the raid.21 Rogers claimed that he incurred the majority of his 
casualties during the French pursuit of his force back to Fort Num-
ber 4. Rogers claimed that only one Ranger had been killed during 
the raid and seven Rangers were wounded. According to Rogers’ 
report of the action, sixty-five to one hundred forty warriors were 
killed, twenty Indian women and children were captured and later 
released, five English prisoners were liberated, and Chief Gill’s wife, 
two sons and three daughters were captured. This seems to be an 
unexplainably small number of casualties compared to the number 
of Indians he claimed to have been killed or captured. Additionally, 
the Rangers captured enough corn to sustain them for the first eight 
days of their escape and evasion back to English territory.   
 The Abenaki claim to have put up stout resistance and to have 
killed forty Rangers. The Abenaki claim cannot be discounted at 
face value. The Rangers had lost the strategic element of surprise 
due to the discovery of their boats at the cache site. According to 
Abenaki oral history, an unnamed warrior came to the Village of St. 
Francis the night before the raid to warn the village that the British 
were nearby.22 The Abenaki claimed that they had moved the major-
ity of their wo men, children, an d elderly memb ers to  another vil-
lage,23 and that only warriors remained to defend the village. This 
would explain their stout defense and claims of significant Ranger 
casualties. Which side has left the most credible history? It is impos-
sible based on the historical evidence to say definitively which ver-
sion of events is the most accurate. It is unusual for both sides to 
agree, independently of each other, on the number of Ranger casu-
alties (to re-state, the Abenaki claim they inflicted forty casualties, 
and Rogers admits to forty-nine total casualties).  While the num-
bers do not match exactly, it is highly improbable that they would 
6Saber and Scroll, Vol. 3, Iss. 2 [2014], Art. 7
http://digitalcommons.apus.edu/saberandscroll/vol3/iss2/7
 
74            Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                    Spring/Summer 2014  be so close coincidentally. It is probable that the Abenaki did inflict 
the number of casualties claimed and that Rogers lost the additional 
nine Rangers during the escape and evasion back to Fort Number 4. 
 
Aftermath of the raid  
 
 The survivors of the raid were then forced to escape and evade 
across country in an unplanned direction because of the discovery 
and destruction of their boats and all the provision stored there. 
The evasion started well but became a survival trek. The food ran 
out after eight days, and the French and Abenaki organized patrols 
to hunt for and ambush any Rangers they could find. “Major Rog-
ers, upon receiving the news of the French and Indian force in pur-
suit, dispatch Lt. McMullen to return to Crown Point. His mission 
was to prepare of reception party for the Rangers.”24 The Rangers 
eventually decided that it would be better to break up into smaller 
units and attempt to evade their way, independent of each other, to 
Fort Number 4.25 Some units became so famished that the capture 
of a “red squirrel was an event.”26 Many years after the fact, a mem-
ber of the Royal Army attached to the Rangers reported that the 
men resorted to cannibalism to survive their harrowing ordeal.27 It is 
impossible, both because of the paucity of detailed records and the 
hectic and harrowing ordeal, to determine exactly how many Rang-
ers were captured and killed by the French or Abenaki patrols. Ma-
jor Rogers, after organizing search and rescue parties, to guide his 
dispersed Ranger force back to friendly lines, composed his report 
and sent it off to General Amherst. The raid, based solely on Rog-
ers’ report, was declared an unheralded success, and immediately 
had an effect on the morale of the military and civilian populations 
of British North America. The raid and its aftermath were trumpet-
ed in newspapers in New York City.28 No longer could the Native 
7Hoeflinger: The Ranger Raid on St. Francis
Published by DigitalCommons@APUS, 2014
 
Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                 Spring/Summer  2014                75 American tribes aligned with the French conduct operations against 
British military or civilian targets with impunity.29 The Native Amer-
icans wo uld now have to  contend with  the possibility th at Rogers ’ 
Corps of Rangers would conduct an attack against their villages 
when the warriors were away on a mission. 
 
What was the strategic effect, if any, of the raid on the conduct 
of the war in New England ? 
 
 What was achieved by the loss of highly skilled, well trained and 
battle hardened Rangers? The propaganda value of the raid was in-
calculable, but wars are not won by the weight of a single propagan-
da victory regardless of its size. Rogers claimed to have killed two 
hundred Abenaki warriors, destroyed their village, and dispersed the 
surviving women and children. If so, the raid would be a blow from 
which the Abenaki would not quickly recover. 
 There is no historical evidence to indicate that the Abenaki Indi-
ans ever waivered in their support of the French until the French 
were finally defeated and the French colony transferred to British 
control. After the war, the Abenaki migrated back to their tradition-
al hunting grounds and persevered. 
 Finally, was the raid a mission within the capabilities and limita-
tions of the Ranger Regiment as it was trained and organized in 
1759? Unequivocally, the answer is yes. The Rangers traveled over 
one hundred fifty miles from their base at Crown Point to their tar-
get of the Village of St. Francis, on the St. Francis River, just south 
of the Saint Lawrence River. The Rangers conducted the infiltration 
and raid as planned. In accordance with Rogers’ command philoso-
phy, a fragmentary order was issued to change the exfiltration from 
a riverine movement to an overland exfiltration. It was decided to re
-supply from the community stores at the target. This major change 
8Saber and Scroll, Vol. 3, Iss. 2 [2014], Art. 7
http://digitalcommons.apus.edu/saberandscroll/vol3/iss2/7
 
76            Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                    Spring/Summer 2014  of plan could have only been executed, already far behind enemy 
lines, by a well-trained and confident force. 
 The raid on St. Francis was a proper mission for a Ranger force 
and it had strategic impact on the French and Indian War, albeit 
largely as a propaganda victory. The Rangers executed the raid 
against the Abenaki Indians Village of St. Francis on 4 October 
1759 and conducted it against the background of the French and 
Indian War’s Mohawk Valley theater of operations. The Raid was a 
propaganda victory, but did not contribute materially to the war ef-
fort. 
 
Notes 
 1 Fred Anderson,  Crucible of War: The Seven Years War and the Fate of Empire in 
British North America, 1754 – 1766 (New York: Vintage Books, 2000), 44. 
 2 Anderson, Crucible, 55. 
 3 Ibid., 52. 
 4 Ibid., 53. 
 5 Ibid. 
 6 Ibid., 54. 
 7 Ibid., 64. 
 8 Frank McLynn, 1759: The Year Britain Became Master of the World  (New York: 
Grove Press, 2004), 332. 
 9 McLynn, 1759,  95. 
 10 McLynn, 1759 , 149-152.  
 11 Anderson, Crucible of War , 337. 
 12 McLynn, 1759 , 154-155.  
 13 McLynn, 1759 , 300-309.  
 14 Anderson, Crucible of War , 197. 
 15 John F. Ross, War on the Run, The Epic Story of Robert Rogers and the Conquest of 
America’s First Frontier  (New York: Bantam Books, 2009), 20. 
 16 Ibid., 26-27.  
 17 Ibid., 43-44.  
 18 Burt G. Loescher,  The History of Rogers’ Rangers, Vol. 2: Genesis, the First 
Green Berets, April 6, 1758 – December 24, 1783 . 1969. (Bowie, MD: Heritage, 2000), 
58. 
 19 Ross, War on the Run , 250. 
 20 Burt G. Loescher, The History of Rogers’ Rangers, Vol. IV: The St. Francis Raid , 
1969. Westminster, Heritage Books, 2008, 38. 
 21 Ibid., 268. 
 22 Deborah P. Clifford, “The Raid On St. Francis,” Historic Roots , no. 3 
(December 1997): 19-20.  
9Hoeflinger: The Ranger Raid on St. Francis
Published by DigitalCommons@APUS, 2014
 
Saber and Scroll Journal                    Volume III Issue II                 Spring/Summer  2014                77  23 Loescher, The History of Rogers’ Rangers, Vol. IV , 38. 
 24 MSG Walter H. Sargent, The Emergence of the American Noncommissioned Of-
ficer:  Rogers’ Rangers During the French and Indian War from 1754 to 1763 , Combined 
Arms Research Library, United States Army Sergeants Major Academy Collection, 
8. 
 25 Ross, War on the Run , 258. 
 26 Colonel Red Reeder, The French and Indian War, Kindle Edition, (Quechee, 
Vermont Heritage Press, 2011), position 1713 of 2517. 
 27 Ian McCulloch, Tim J. Todish, British Light Infantryman of the Seven Years’ 
War: North America 1757 – 63 (Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2004), 28. 
 28 Ross, War on the Run , 268. 
 29 Ibid., 269-270.  
 
Bibliography 
Anderson, Fred. Crucible of War: The Seven Years War and the Fate of Empire in British 
 North America, 1754 – 1766. New York: Vintage Books, 2000. 
 
Clifford, Deborah P. “The Raid On St. Francis.” Historic Roots, No 3, December 
 1997, pg. 17-22.  
 
Loescher, Burt G. The History of Rogers’ Rangers, Vol. 2: Genesis, the First Green Berets, 
 April 6, 1758 – December 24, 1783 . 1969. Bowie, MD: Heritage, 2000.  
 
—. The History of Rogers’ Rangers, Vol. IV: The St. Francis Raid , 1969. Westminster, 
 Heritage Books, 2008. 
 
McCulloch, Ian and Tim J. Todish. British Light Infantryman of the  Seven Years’ War:  
 North America 1757 – 63. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, 2004. 
 
McLynn, Frank. 1759:  The Year Britain Became Master of the World. New York: 
 Grove Press, 2004. 
 
Reeder, Colonel Red. The French and Indian War. Quechee, Vermont Heritage 
 Press, 2011. Kindle.  
 
Ross, John F.  War on the Run, The Epic Story of Robert Rogers and the Conquest of 
 America’s First Frontier.  New York: Bantam Books, 2009. 
 
Sargent, MSG Walter H. The Emergence of the American Noncommissioned Officer: Rog-
 ers’ Rangers During the French and Indian War from 1754 to 1763.  Combined 
 Arms Research Library, United States Army Sergeants Major Academy Col-
 lection. 
 
 
 
 
 
10Saber and Scroll, Vol. 3, Iss. 2 [2014], Art. 7
http://digitalcommons.apus.edu/saberandscroll/vol3/iss2/7